Quantum Computation for the Understanding of Mass: Simulating Quantum Field Theories


Nature is described, at its most fundamental level, through the mathematical framework provided by Quantum Field Theory (QFTh). Nonetheless, there are still many unsolved mysteries; for example, although most of the matter in the visible universe is made out of almost massless quarks and massless gluons, the sum of their individual masses (i.e. bare mass) amounts to only a small fraction of the total observed mass (i.e. dressed mass). To address these questions, QCD is currently studied using brute-force numerics on the world’s largest supercomputers, such as those at Argonne National Laboratory. However, due to their intrinsically complex nature, many aspects of quantum field theories cannot be studied on classical computers; so an important path forward is to develop methods to simulate these models on quantum processors. In this talk, I will outline a project to continue to develop said methods; with a particular focus on addressing the mystery behind the origin of mass. This effort is only just beginning, nonetheless, performing calculations on a quantum computer is far from being a straightforward task. Any problem that we want to solve needs to be formulated in a way that allows it to get mapped onto specific qubit representations; and, thus far, that has only been achieved for relatively simple problems.

For this presentation I will focus on a discretized version of the Nambuu–Jona-Lasino model (NJL) in 1 + 1 dimensions: a well known effective field theory, regarded as a low-energy approximation to QCD. The main advantage of using this model is that it retains certain key features of the more fundamental theory, such as the so called Goldstone modes and dynamical chiral symmetry breaking; which in turn are responsible for the creation of dressed mass. Also, this model can be solved nonperturbatively through the standard leading order truncation; a fact that makes it a great candidate for testing new quantum algorithms —since verifying the solutions returned by any quantum computation is currently a major challenge.
